We've seen how dynamic
typing in JavaScript lets
us do some interesting things and
can also be a little dangerous.
But what if you have a variable and
you want to know what type it is,
programmatically?
Well, JavaScript does come with
some utilities to help us with that,
but they aren't perfect.
This is typeof, instanceof, and
figuring out what something is.
I've gone ahead and pre-filled our app.js
file with some variables of different
types, and I'm using the typeof
keyword and the instanceof keyword.
For starters the typeof tells
us what you would expect.
What type of thing is this.
So, for example, I have a variable
set to a numeric primitive,
a number primitive, and the first thing
that I see printed is the word number.
Notice that's lower case n.
I'm not using the function
constructor Number with a capital N,
which we generally want to avoid.
So I get that primitive type number,
with a lowercase n.
So I can check and see if my variable is
a number, this typeof returns a string.
It's an operator, which means it's
a function that takes a parameter and
it returns a string.
So the string that it returns is number,
in this case.
Here I made a string, so typeof space and
then the variable I'm checking
returns the string, string.
I have an empty object, this could have
properties and methods, it doesn't matter.
When I look at typeof and pass this object
to it, I get the word, the string, object.
Here's one that's a little weird.
Arrays are objects.
And so when I pass to it an array,
an empty array,
typeof, it gives me back also object.
That's not so useful.
There's a couple of ways around this.
One of them is to use both
the prototype concept and
the concept of .call,
which you've already seen.
When I do the typeof on the array,
I get the string, object.
If I was to try, let's say,
console.log(d.toString()); maybe
that would help me.
What i get is just an empty string,
because
it actually tries to take the contents
of the array and convert it to a string.
So that's not helpful either.
However, on that base object,
called object, that I'm looking at,
there is a two string property
on its prototype, on this
function constructor's prototype,
which is the base object toString.
And then instead of acting on this Object
function constructor of the prototype,
I'm doing .call, which as you know means
invoke this function but tell it
what this variable should point to.
So since toString uses the this
variable to output its value,
I'm saying take my array and
call this toString on it deeper
down in the prototype chain.
And that little trick gets me this string.
And this is a string, it's object and
then the word array with
some brackets around it.
So at least I can tell that
this is an array this way.
Then I have a Person function constructor.
I give it a capital P and
I'm not returning anything.
And so
I set a variable equal to new Person.
And let's see,
the typeof e is also an object.
That's expected.
This is just an object.
This other keyword called instanceof,
though, what it does,
it tells me if any object is
down the prototype chain.
If anywhere down that whole prototype
chain of going proto, to proto,
to proto, I find this type of object.
If I do then this first parameter
is an instance of that one.
So e should return true because it's
an instance of person because we can find
the person down the prototype chain.
And it does come back true.
Lastl,y we have typeof undefined and
typeof null.
Well, undefined isn't anything,
so its type is undefined.
So that kind of makes sense.
One last thing that's been a bug
in JavaScript since forever,
a long time, so much so
that there are libraries and
a lot of code that rely on it being so,
so they've never fixed it.
If you try to do typeof and something
is null, you'll end up with an object.
I know that's kind of terrible,
but it's a bug and
it's been around too
long to fix in some ways.
So typeof, which is an operator that
accepts a parameter, but it's essentially
a function returning a string, will tell
you under most cases what something is.
An instanceof,
if you dealing with object chains,
will tell you what something
has in its prototype chain.
And these can be useful under certain
circumstances when you need to tell what
something is that's being passed in
if you don't know ahead of time or
it might be multiple types.
Oh, and one more thing.
Let's set a variable z equal
to just an empty function.
What do you think I'll get when
i do console.log(typeof z)?
Lets refresh.
I get the string function.
Remember, I can check the type of a
variable to see if it's a function because
functions in JavaScript are objects.
So since it's a first class function,
it's really an object.
I can also see if
a variable is a function.
Pretty useful.
All right, so
that's typeof and instanceof.
Try these out for yourself.
See what kind of results you get.